# V8

## Node's Popularity:

- JavaScript: Full-stack
- Non-blocking: event-driven
- Virtual Machine: single-threaded

2 most important players in Node's architecture: V8 and `libuv`

Node's default VM is V8. Other VMs are Chakra by Microsoft. Node is on a path to be VM-agnostic.

`node -p 'process.versions.v8'`

## V8 Feature Groups

- Shipping: on by default
- Staged: almost complete, enabled with `--harmony` flag
- In Progress

Example: string padding is in progress (in v7). Running `node -p "'Node'.padEnd(8, '*')"` doesn't work, but it does by adding `--harmony`\n\nYou can see all "in progress" features by running: `node --v8-options | grep "in progress"`

Interesting options for garbage collection:

- `--expose_gc` to manually trigger garbage collection
- `--trace_gc` to print a trace whenever gc happens

You can enable features at runtime using the `v8` module with the `setFlagsFromString` method.
Also useful: `getHeapSpaceStatistics`

Node is more than a wrapper for V8. Between your code and the OS, there is:

- V8: Node uses V8 via V8's C++ API
- Core Modules: Node has an API we can use in JS and it allows us to interact with the FS, network, timers, etc.
- C++ Bindings: the Node API eventually executes C++ code using V8 object and function templates (but it's not part of V8 itself)
- libuv: Node handles the waiting for asynchronous events using libuv. When there's a callback to call, Nodes passes control to V8, which is single-threaded and blocking. `libuv` is a C library developed for Node, but is now used by Rust, Julia and others. It's used to abstract the non-blocking IO operations to a consitent interface across different OS. It also provides Node with the event loop.
- Other dependencies:

  - http-parser
  - c-ares: async DNS queries
  - OpenSSL: used in tls and crypto modules
  - zlib: streaming compression and decompression interfaces
